# cs465-fullstack
CS-465 Full Stack Development with MEAN

Architecture
Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?

The Angular project structure is different from that of the Express HTML customer-facing page such that ‘separation of concern’ and speed is a top priority. Angular is able to generate components that facilitate each separation. Utilizing this generation saves time with file and folder creation as well as organizational techniques a developer would typically have to do on their own agenda. Additionally, Angular uses data binding with HTML such that a single page application (SPA) is mostly defined by HTML yet can handle JavaScript objects quickly with RESTFul API calls to the database. 

On the other hand, Express is buried in JavaScript files which is helpful for multi-page websites where HTML components become lengthy and repetitive. Express can use (ie.) Handlebars directives to simulate ‘functional programming’ for HTML where blocks of code can be written once and called repeatedly. While Express can support SPAs, Angular is optimized for SPAs. Express has more of a backend structural taste, whereas Angular is strong-suited for frontend development.

The advantages of SPA functionality are boasting fast load times using less bandwidth (because of the HTML markup), ability to quickly and easily add features through HTML and API calls saving time and money, and further providing a sense of seamlessness for the user experience. The disadvantages of SPA functionality: SPAs use browser storage and thereby rich in client resources; SPAs lack SEO optimization when a developer fills the SPA with JavaScript because of how difficult it is for a search engine to web crawl JavaScript; SPAs pose a security threat if a developer does not pay attention to what is being sent over a header upon initialization. Some additional functionality that SPAs have versus that of a simple web application are being more responsive to users since oftentimes full page reloads are unnecessary, and SPAs are optimized to correspond data in the background such that AJAX calls can be easily made which give that sense of ‘liveliness’ to a website.

Functionality
How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.

JSON is a JavaScript Object Notation used to store and transfer blocks of data; whereas, JavaScript is a programming language popularized by frontend development but often used these days for full stack applications given the languages ability to perform client-side and server-side operations. JSON ties frontend and backend together because in this particular full stack, MongoDB--a NoSql database often used in the MEAN full stack--uses JSON to store data and, further, uses JSON objects in its responses to browser requests. The frontend can then accept those JSON objects as data to be manipulated by JavaScript to ultimately be displayed for the user.

Some instances in the full stack process where I refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies were converting static HTML to Express HTML, adding Handlebars directives, adding an Angular-driven SPA, and overall adhering to an MVC (Model-View-Controller) architecture. Express adds dynamic capability to the static HTML pages. Handlebars directives greatly reduces repetitious blocks of HTML and basically act as functions that define a schema and use JSON objects to fill that schema with HTML and its attributes on each call whether its a single directive or a loop. The Angular SPA, while providing user and site administration for the end product, also enabled timely development to take place given its component-driven framework allowing for quick additions of features and functionality. 

The MVC architecture works well with Angular to champion the 'separation of concern' because (ie.) when generating components, Angular provides a suite of .css, .html, and  .ts(TypeScript) files for each component into its own folder which allows a developer to seamlessly add code without having to think about and/or create the necessary files respectively. Then, if not already done by command line, the folder can easily be dragged and dropped per desired architecture. Essentially, this is the idealogy behind reusable UI components in that not only can these folders/components be moved around within projects, but they can also be copy/pasted into future projects assuming the code within the files is catered to reusability. Reusable UI components save time and money as well as being easily maintained because of knowing what to expect and where to find them.

Testing
Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.

For this full stack application, I utilized an API testing environment known as Postman. Postman is so convenient in being able to quickly select your desired HTTP-request method (GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE), entering an endpoint (ie. http://localhost:3000/api/someurl), and seeing if the request for that endpoint returns an object from the database. In the case of adding a layer of security (ie. registration and login endpoints), you may receive a hashed token which is a very long alphanumeric code used to authorize a user. Then, to test a user's privileges within the site, you can add that token to see if the application will allow the request thus facilitating a response. Postman also allows you to see what is contained within the headers and body of the request/response. You can register a user and use that users credentials and token to access an endpoint. In other words, Postman allows you to develop your API without having to fully deploy your local test site to perform tests thereby saving time and money as well as giving the developer an interface privvy to a ton of useful endpoint information that can be optimized for troubleshooting and debugging API development.

Reflection
How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?

This course has helped me in reaching my professional goals in bringing various aspects of my degree program into one collective project to see how it all fits together. Full stack development is a highly multi-disciplinary skill and requires astute attention to detail to effectively turn out a lucrative product. This course has exposed me to the benefits of saving time and money using a single language, JavaScript, to combine frontend and backend. Given my pursuit of a BS.CSC.SEG with a Minor in Mathematics, this course is paramount in equipping me with an arsenal of useful tools that will guide me to a greater understanding of engineering software and the science behind computers.
